Geosci 541 Ð PaleobiologyBen Davis Barnes(2/08/16)Reading Response: Niche Conservatism above the Species Level (Hadly, Spaeth, and Li, 2009)Article Summary:	The concept of niche conservatism comes from ecological and paleontological observations that species exhibit traits which make them well-adapted to their living environment, and conserve these traits over time. The authors of this study seek to expand our understanding of niche conservatism by testing them on the higher taxonomic level of genera. This study uses geographical range as a proxy for niche-space, arguing that both environment-based niche constraints and inherent trait-based niche constraints manifest as geographical range. Using data gather from mammal genera over the past 130 000 years in North America, the authors compare and contrast genera range sizes in the Late Pleistocene and the Late Holocene, following the onset of LP glacial-interglacial cycles. By concluding that generic ranges, on average, grow over this time interval, the authors assert that environment-based niche constraints are less important to genus niche size (because otherwise the rapid climatic fluctuations in Holocene would have greatly altered the ranges), and on a genus level niche conservatism is present. One hypothesis for this observation is that when one species goes extinct, other closely-related congeneric species with similar inherent traits can expand and fill the vacated niche, allowing for dramatic species-level fluctuations but conserving niches at the genus level. In conclusion, this paper hypothesized niche conservatism at the generic level, and relatively little effect on generic niche-space due to climate change. However, given the rate of range changes in the past century due to anthropogenic effects, this level of conservatism might not apply to the near future.Things you liked about this paper:	One good quality to paper has is detailed explanation of the experimental design. Upon reading the abstract, my immediate thoughts were ÒHow can geographic range accurately represent realized niches?Ó and ÒWhy choose mammals, which typically have slower reproductive rates than other classes?Ó However, both of these questions were well-answered in the introduction. Explanations on why the time intervals were chosen and the limitations of the study were also present, providing an excellent self-awareness to the paper.	Another good element in the paper was the provision of a detailed data summary table, which outlines the genera used, the number of species in each, and the actual numbers of range and rank which went into their calculations. This does a lot to increase the transparency of their methods, and while dry it does a lot to ensure confidence in their approach.Things you did not like about this paper:	Although I over all enjoyed reading this paper and felt comfortable with its hypotheses (albeit because as a geologist I may be ignorant to oversights by the authors), there were a few points I admired less. One abstract sense I got over the course of reading the paper was that the organization was a little bit sloppy: call it nitpicking, but I felt a disjoint between the hypotheses in the introduction they set out to prove, the results, and the conclusions. It seemed like the introduction took a very large scope, the entirety of niche theory, and focused too long on that before specifying the actual scope of the data. The hypotheses concerning the mammalian genera in the past 130000 years are very interesting, so prefacing them with exposition into the entire theory of niche conservatism felt like needless grandstanding. Finally, in the discussion several conclusions are mentioned that could have been better set up by hypotheses or background in the introduction: I think specifically to the conclusion that larger mammal genera increased range much more than small mammals, and the implications of the ecology through the 1300000 years that led to that, as well as further conclusions concerning congeneric species competition, congeneric niche vacation and in-fill, and the limitation of paleontology on the specific level which could be better addressed by generic studies. These were all important points that felt slightly shoe-horned into the conclusion, and while it may not have been pragmatic to address each one in more detail in the introduction, it led to a general sense of unease with the paper format.Evaluate the Graphs and Figures:	The table and figures are adequate. None of the figures provided great elucidation of the conclusions, but they illustrated the data rather well to give a good image of how the study was conducted. It felt like an excellent attempt at experimental transparency, as mentioned above. Table 1 was an especially good inclusion, as it showed enough data and figures to allow the reader to recreate the study. Figures 2 and 4 were both good example genera to show what the researchers were measuring, but again, none of the figures provided any great conceptual value: they were simple enough and detailed, which is perhaps of far greater value than convoluted conceptual figures.